[panting]
Today's front squat day. This is the
first time in over a year that I've done
a front squat. I used to love doing
front squats, but not the reason why
you'd think. A lot of people consider
that a front squat is really great for
quad building because it's more upright
or whatever it might be, but I did front
squats. I'm a powerlifter, so I don't
need to do a front squat in my sport. If
you're a weightlifter, you do to do a
clean bottom position is a front squat.
But apart from those athletes, apart
from weightlifters, you technically
don't ever need to do a front squat. But
a lot of people consider that it's a
better quadricep exercise. And I've
heard all of the arguments, and I used
to preach all of the arguments. The main
argument being the front squat allows
you to be more upright. The more upright
you are, the more you're able to bend
your knees. And the more you can bend
your knees, the more you'll develop
quadriceps, which makes sense. You know,
bend your knees under load. And then the
next thing they say is go and have a
look at the best weightlifters in the
world. They have incredible quadriceps,
which is also true. So there's the
argument for why of all the squat
patterns is the best for quad building.
Now, I'm going to tell you that I
disagree. And the reason why I disagree
is because of the loadability of the
exercise. So right now is kind of a
light day. Uh but my best ever front
squat, pretty big. It's 260 kg. That's
really good. I think it's fantastic for
a powerlifter. That's not my main
exercise that I train. And at that time,
my best back squat in wraps was was
around 400. But in sleeves, I did a 320
kg paused back squat around that time, I
could front squat 260 kg. So, that's
really, really good. But I did the front
squats for fun, not because I believed
that it was good for uh building quads
or anything like that. Now, the reason
why I don't think it's amazing for
building quadriceps, is because when
you're considering the exercises for
muscle building, like what's the best
exercise to build muscle, what you need
to think about is firstly, what muscle
are you targeting? We're talking right
now about quadriceps. And when you're
thinking about that muscle, you got to
think, does this exercise make it so
that that muscle that I'm targeting is
the limiting factor of the movement or
the reason why I failed? So, another way
of framing that is if you do a front
squat, do you fail that lift? like when
you take it to the limit, do you f that
lift because your quadriceps just can't
push anymore? Think about it. And the
answer is typically no. It's usually
your ability to brace or your upper back
strength or your core strength that
folds first. Like you you front squat
and you go under maximum loads and then
you'll dump the bar. It's not because
your legs aren't strong enough. It's
because your core isn't strong enough.
So therefore, are the quadriceps the
limiting factor of the movement? The
answer is usually no. So therefore, I
consider that a high bar back squat. So
low bar back squat is is more hip
dominant. A high bar back squat is a lot
more upright, especially if you elevate
the heels like with a weightlifting
shoe. And it's more loadable movement
than a front squat, which means because
it's more loadable, it allows you to
stimulate more quadriceps. Now, here's
the next thing. In a high bar back
squat, are the quadriceps the limiting
factor of the movement? Kind of more so
than a front squat is my answer. But
still, there's still so many muscles
that come and assist. And if you truly
fail a back squat, maybe it's your
quads, maybe it's your back, maybe it's
your your balance, I don't know. Like,
is the quadriceps the limiting factor of
the movement? And this is where you get
the debate of are machines superior to
free weights for quadriceps development?
And the conclusion is typically machines
are better because this is the only way
you can guarantee that you're
positioning your body in a way cuz
you're locked in a like in a hack squat
or a leg press where you have no choice.
But the quads, the target muscles are
the limiting factor of the movement.
Next step. You guys think I hate
squatting all of a sudden? I don't. I'm
just playing devil's advocate.
This feels very foreign. The discomfort
because I haven't done it in a while is
is in the front. It's like the skin and
um yeah, that just feels strange. But I
know that that's just a conditioning
process and it'll take a few sessions
and then all of a sudden it'll feel
comfortable. But
anyway, back to my discussion. You guys
think I hate squats all of a sudden.
It's a funny thing because I've been
doing this for a very long time. I love
squats. Squats are my favorite exercise.
And a front squat is one of my favorite
variations. But objectively,
the argument of what's the best for quad
building is, yeah, it's not front
squats. Anyway, we're we're doing front
squats today because I still believe
it's a great exercise and there are a
lot of great benefits to it. So, what
I'm doing as an introduction, I'm
feeling it with pauses. So, a lot of the
times when I'm reintroducing an exercise
that I haven't done for a long time, I
like to do a variation that doesn't
allow me to shift as much, right? So, my
limiting factor is probably going to be
the discomfort on my neck and my
shoulders. So, I think that that's going
to give way before my legs do. So,
therefore, I want to choose a variation
where I can't load it as much. So, that
doesn't get as uncomfortable, but I can
still stimulate the right muscles. So,
anyway, I don't know how heavy I'm going
to go. I'm up to 120. I'm going to be
doing pauses up until I get to a decent
point. I don't know. In the top of my
mind, I have like 180. Maybe I can do a
one 180 pause front squat. It's not
massive. And I'm suspecting that that
should be comfortable. But that's where
I'm going to leave it. And then I'll do
some back down work.
>> Practice one
>> uh just for a top single. Yeah, of
course. This is what I like to do. Top
step back down set method. As you guys
know, you're following my page. Top step
back down set method. It's not just a
great tool for teaching you how to peak
in strength. It's also a great way for
me to reintroduce the exercise. So I
feel, you know, a heavyish weight and
then I get the rep work in. So this is
how I retrain, recondition my body to to
be comfortable under a front squat
position.
>> Checklist of what you're looking for in
this exercise. [snorts]
>> For sure.
>> Yeah. Because it's pretty important.
Now, a few things. So something that a
lot of people talk about is my
shoulders. So whenever I'm doing a back
squat, you'll know that how limited I am
with my shoulder mobility. When I do a
back squat, I hold the barbell from
collar to collar. It's not because I
think you should hold it wide. The cue
is to hold the bar as close as your
shoulder mobility allows. That's as
close as I can get. I can't get under
the bar when I'm holding it this close.
I just physically can't. My shoulders
are so damn tight. So, that's why I hold
it wide. Now, same applies for the front
squat. So, you've got two different
positions. One is a, you know, the clean
position. So, here I can get there, but
then to unrackck it, I can't get my
elbows up high enough. So, therefore, I
mean, I used to be able to. I've lost a
lot of mobility there. So therefore, I
won't be using the clean position. So
I'll do the the bodybuilder grip or the
crossover grip. I don't know what you
want to call it. But actually, I don't
even cross my hands over. I If you come
in and zoom in, you'll see what I
actually do. I place it where I need to
place it.
There's an airplane going over. It's
going to be too loud. I'll do it in a
minute. All right. So, what I do is I I
put my This is just how I set it up. I
put my thumb on the line so I know I've
got symmetry. And then what I do is I
place it up on my neck. But what I'm
doing is I'm placing it behind the shelf
created by my anterior deltoid. Okay? So
some people lack the mobility or they
have like forward head posture and they
can't get it behind this shelf. It needs
to sit behind that front delt. If it's
you and it kind of sits in the middle of
the deltoid and you get bruised shoulder
belly, you're in the wrong position. And
in my opinion, you're not able to load
it significantly enough for it to be an
effective exercise. It's too far away
from your center of mass and you just
won't be a good front squatter. So
that's my number one key for the rack
position is to get it behind that shelf.
Now that feels uncomfortable right
up on your neck.
[snorts]
Okay. So, if you saw where my hands
were, a lot of people say that that's
the crossover grip. Um, I I don't
believe in that. Like people hold on to
the bar like this. I don't believe you
should hold onto the bar. I'm using my
thumbs. I hold my hands like this and I
use my thumbs to to push it into my neck
so it doesn't roll forward. So that's
what I'm hoping for. I'm hoping it
doesn't fall off my shelf. I'm pushing
it back the whole time. Right. And then
the objective here is to people say to
keep the elbows high. The idea of
keeping the elbows high is to remain
upright. So if if that drops usually the
elbows drop and the torso drops as I
said the upper back and the core is
usually the limiting factor of the
movement. So what you want people say
hold the elbows high is a good queue. I
think it's a great queue elbows high but
for me I'm holding it here and I I want
to keep the elbows high but it's
important to understand why am I keeping
the elbows high? that is in aid of
maintaining an upright torso in the
bottom position because
you want to balance the barbell when
you're in the bottom of the squat. You
want to balance the barbell in line with
your midfoot or the center of your base
of support. So, you see what I do? I
push it behind the shelf, elbows high,
and then I aim to be as upright as
possible. Okay? So, let's go a little
bit heavier. So, that was 120. We go 140
next around my neck.
And I don't want it to slip off here. I
mean, I should be able to position my
body in a way that it doesn't fold, but
I am used to tipping forward in my
squats. But anyway,
let's see. 140.
So, behind the shelf. That's important.
And I'm not holding on to the bar. I'm
pushing it in.
>> [snorts]
>> uncomfortable. I can feel that it's
coming up easier. So, the squat part
isn't hard. It's not. It's just a new
part. So, anyway, so now you know my
opinion on whether or not front squat uh
is good for muscle building. Like, it's
objectively not the best. If you were to
choose a free weight exercise, a back
squat is superior to a front squat if
your goal is purely quadriceps
development and you're using it as a
bodybuilding exercise. And if you're
using it as a bodybuilding exercise, I'd
go one step further and say the stiletto
squat is the most superior barbell free
weight exercise for quadriceps
development. So therefore, if I'm not a
weightlifter, so I don't need to do it
for my sport, and I don't think it's
superior for building leg mass or
strength. So back squat builds more
muscle and builds more strength than a
front squat. What is a front squat
actually good for? Here's the next thing
is upper back strength. So this is where
I work with a lot of people that love to
include a front squat because of the
benefits that it has on your upper back
strength, which is true. It strengthens
the hell out of your upper back. So
people some people I don't want to say
all people, some people love a front
squat for the benefits and carry over
that it has for your deadlift. Does a
front squat carry over to your deadlift?
Of course it does. Now I'm going to talk
about some really good deadlifters and
how they train. In particular, the best
deadlifter in the world, Half Thor
Beyon. Now I happen to know his training
very well because I'm his coach and I
write his programs and I've been doing
that since 2016. And when I met him, his
best deadlift was 450 kg. Technique
wasn't amazing. It's far from it. Now
his best deadlift is 510 kg. And his
technique is incredible. How much front
squatting have we done to get Thor
Bjönson to as strong as he is with
deadlifts? The answer is I would
confidently say I've never programmed a
front squat for him ever. So the
argument front squat is a great exercise
to carry over for your deadlift. Yeah.
Well, why haven't I used it with Thor?
I'll tell you why. Because there's a
million exercises that carry over to
your deadlift. There's so many good
exercises. The main exercise that
carries over to your deadlift is the
deadlift itself.
Specificity. But of course, I do believe
in variation. I do believe in using
accessory exercises. Now, let's go to
strongman. So, deadlifts, does it carry
over? Yes. Is the best exercise? I guess
it's kind of there. If you like doing
it, I'd say this is what I'm going to
allude to is enjoyment. But I'm going to
get there in a moment. The next thing a
lot of people say, you know, anterior
loaded exercises. So, my upbringing as a
strength coach and, you know, a want to
be strength athlete. I was taught by my
early mentor Charles Polloquin. he's
passed away and he is one of the best
strength was one of the best strength
coaches in the world coached Olympic
athletes a lot of team sport athletes
professional level in multiple teams
multiple sports and he believes that the
front squat is a superior test of
strength for athleticism than a back
squat so that's what a lot of his
athletic testing revolved around your
front squatting he also liked to include
weightlifting movements for his athletic
population as well so for his team sport
athletes he liked uh the carryover of
your cleans and snatches and your
weightlifting exercises to build
strength and power for his non- strength
sport athletes. So, he favored the front
squat. So, I guess that's where I
started doing my front squats. I used to
consider it's one of the best exercises
because in athleticism and in a lot of
sports, you need to have strength in
your anterior core. So, that's the
anterior core. So, we got posterior
chain strength, which is deadlifts, but
you also need to be able to do things
like, you know, in tackling sports and
judo or grappling sports, you need to be
able to hold the weight of another human
in front of you. So this is where
anterior load strength in your core, a
front squat ticks those boxes. It's a
fantastic exercise for that. Now let's
go to strongman. A lot of the strongman
events is heavily anterior loaded. So
atlas stones, uh shield carries, Conan's
wheel. So Conan's wheel, that's anterior
load. And now a lot of the times they
don't need a Conan's wheel. They're
doing zer hold runs. So you're holding a
yoke with the weight in front of you. So
performing a front squat has huge
carryover for your strength that's
required for those events. Is it true?
Yes, it's true it does. However, there
are so many exercises that also carry
over. And this is what you need to
consider. Is how fatiguing are these
exercises that you're performing? These
accessory exercises. Are they
interfering with the recovery that's
required to doing the exercise itself or
doing all of the other exercises that
are prescribed in the program? These are
the things you need to consider. All
right. 160.
[clears throat] I got to switch on cuz
when I talk I switch off and it gets
heavy. All right. 140 felt hard. I feel
like it moved well, but it felt hard.
Once again, felt heavy. I don't know if
it looked heavy. Definitely felt heavy.
It's been a while since I've done this,
as I keep on saying. Let me have a look.
[gasps]
This is really foreign to me.
It feels like, you know, it looks like
I'm using the wrong muscles. I feel like
I'm just finding the groove. I think
this will be my top set. I think this
will be my top set. And then every week,
you know, like I'm a lot stronger than
this, but it's just lack of familiarity.
So every week, you know, if I I'd
probably consider this today. It might
even be like an RP9.
Maybe I'll fail it. I don't even know.
But either way, like that's the plan. I
just had 180 in my head when I was doing
this cuz I think of course I can do 180.
Like currently my last squat session I
did 250 kg for five or was it even six
reps? I think I did six reps
or five or six. Like that's pretty
strong. My squat strength is strong.
Last week I deadlifted 300 kg for a
single which is why I don't want to go
super heavy today. But either way
>> I did forget it. But either way it's
hard. Anyway, so the objective is to
rebuild the movement gently. you know, I
think 180 for one and I think next week
I'll be able to take bigger jumps like
maybe I'll be able to take 10 kg jumps
every week. So 180, 190, 200, 210, 220,
I don't know. We'll see. So therefore,
all I'm talking about, so with front
squats and strongman, like I said, I've
never never programmed a single front
squat for Thor Bjönson. And he's good at
a lot of events. He's good at Conan's
wheel. He's good at zer holds. He's good
at holding heavy weights in front of his
body and running with it. He's the best
in the world at deadlifts. And he's the
best in the world at atlas stones. So,
the front squat has so much value for
building strength in the anterior core.
Why aren't I using it? Like I said,
there are many exercises that strengthen
the anterior core. And do you actually
need it? Like, maybe not. So, therefore,
why am I doing it? Something that I talk
a lot about training morale and enjoying
what you do. So, you might hear someone
say,
"This is the favorite exercise." They
won't even say it's a favorite exercise.
They'll say, "This is the best
exercise." And I'll use front squat.
This is the best exercise as a carryover
for strongman or weightlifterss or of
course yes weightlifterss they need it
but um for to carry over for your
deadlift strength or to carry over for
your atlas stones or whatever exercise.
It's like it's a great exercise. Is it
the best? There are many good exercises.
I'll tell you when it's the best if you
love doing it. Because if you love doing
it that's when you're going to apply
more effort. When you apply more effort
you do better at it and then it makes
you stronger. Do you get it? So, this is
where training morale and actually
enjoying the exercises that you perform
makes you stronger because you apply
more effort and you do better at it. And
it could be the exact reason why you
turn up to your training sessions
and do well. Anyway, this is going to be
my top set. I'm going to switch on.
Okay.
>> [sighs]
>> What?
So note for next time, this knurling
here for a back squat is not needed for
a front squat. It's just not. And on a
powerlifting bar, it is very aggressive
knurling. And it's a brand new Alco bar.
Love my bar, but just don't love it so
much for front squats. This is why a lot
of CrossFit bars have smooth center
nurling. There's no center nurling, I
should say, for that reason. Anyway,
whatever. Uh, triples if I'm strong
enough.
Okay.
Um, that felt good. Now, this is the
beauty of a top set, back down set. So
last time I spoke about the top set back
down set, it was in light of great way
to teach you how to handle a heavy
single and to peak your body. And the
reason why it's a great way is because
heavy singles, the skill of heavy
singles is needed, but it's very
demanding. And if you only do heavy
singles, you're not doing enough volume
to maintain or even build new muscle. So
doing the heavy single and then the
lighter loads with higher volume allows
you to maintain that muscle mass. Now,
in this instance, that top single
potentiated my back down work. What does
that mean? Had I come in and just aimed
for 140 triples, that would have felt a
little bit harder than how it felt just
then. So what I did was took my body up
to a top set, which felt challenging. It
wasn't an absolute limit, so it didn't
fatigue me hugely. It was very hard
because of the familiarization, so it's
very rusty that movement, but coming
back down doing the drop sets now
allowed me to do that very well. So that
was easy. I'm going to do three sets of
three on here. Now, three reps. That
doesn't seem like much. No, it's not.
However, I've got a few rules with my
exercise selection. Front squats I
typically So, this is something I
learned from Charles Polloquin. He told
me a while ago and it suited me just
fine. He said, "Don't take front squats
more than six repetitions because this
is where the fatigue factor of the
muscles that aren't your quadriceps
really kicks in. So, your upper back
doesn't have that strength endurance to
hold onto that weight for very long. So,
therefore, keep the reps, you know,
under that certain time under tension.
So, six reps is kind of the upper limit.
The next thing I'm adding pauses. So if
you do a normal rep, however long that
takes. If you're doing a pause rep, you
know, I consider that like one and a
half reps. So therefore, you know,
whenever I'm doing a pause, so if you're
doing, you know, high rep sets and you
think this exercise suits sixes, like
front squat suits sixes, what if you do
sixes with a pause? That's not sixes
anymore. That's more like nine reps,
right? So, this is why triples, you
know, if ever I'm doing a front squat
with a pause, I'll do, you know, one to
four. If I'm doing straight reps, I
don't even like six reps. Uh, some
people do high rep front squats. I
don't. I think that to do six if you
like. For me, five is probably my upper
limit, but even then, I like this. So,
3x3. This is a really nice
reintroduction of the exercise. This is
my secondary squat day for the week. My
optimal for building as big of a squat
as possible is to squat two times per
week. One heavy session, one light
session, and this is my light session.
So, this is going to be not so heavy.
So, it's a front squat. It was hard, but
because the weight is objectively not
that heavy compared to what I'm doing
with my deadlifts and my back squats,
it's not as fatiguing on my nervous
system. So, it's easier for me to
recover from. So, it stimulates but not
annihilates. It's going to complement
all the rest of my work without
accumulating further fatigue. So, my
rest is going to be 5 minutes and then I
go again. All right, set two.
[sighs and panting]
[snorts]
Okay, that was set two. That felt okay.
I actually didn't rest five minutes. I
rested about three minutes then because
I just got a little bit of news. I'm
going to end this session a little bit
short. I've got news that Whiz Khalifa
is in town and he's going to be training
some kickboxing at my mate's gym. my
mate over there, that big guy, Alex,
godly Strong Simon and uh he's uh
training for a kickboxing event and this
is where he trains his boxing. And so
I'm going to come over, check it out,
maybe do a bit of fanboy, get a
photograph, and then I'm going to come
back. But either way, that's that
session over. A little bit of an insight
on front squats. I hope you enjoyed that
and I'll see you guys next time. So
check this out, right? Can you see my
neck? So this is
You can't. No, I can't. So, this is
very, very rough nurling. That's for the
to grip onto your back, but you don't
really need it on the front.
So, can you see this is not what
normally happens when I'm doing front
squats, but because it's session one in
I don't know, over a year with the
powerlifting bar, not a weightlifting
bar,
it's already peeling the skin here. like
that is sensitive skin. That doesn't
happen. So, that's going to take a bit
of conditioning. Um, and that's where I
felt it. Uh, not my legs, not my body.
It was like just uncomfortable here.
Anyway, now you know.